federalist 67
the executive department
from the new york packet
tuesday march 11 1788
hamilton
to the people of the state of new york
the constitution of the executive
department of the proposed government
claims next our attention
there is hardly any part of the system
which could have been attended with
greater difficulty in the arrangement of
it than this and there is perhaps none
which has been invaded against with less
candor or criticized with less judgment
here the writers against the
constitution seem to have taken pains to
signalize their talent of
misrepresentation
calculating upon the aversion of the
people to monarchy they have endeavoured
to enlist all their jealousies and
apprehensions in opposition to the
intended president of the united states
not merely as the embryo but as the
full-grown progeny of that detested
parent
to establish the pretended affinity they
have not scrupled to draw resources even
from the regions of fiction the
authorities of a magistrate in few
instances greater in some instances less
than those of a governor of new york
have been magnified into more than royal
prerogatives he has been decorated with
attributes superior in dignity and
splendor to those of a king of great
britain he has been shown to us with a
diadem sparkling on his brow and the
imperial purple flowing in his train he
has been seated on a throne surrounded
with minions and mistresses giving
audience to the unvoice of foreign
potentates in all the supercilious pomp
of majesty the images of asiatic
despotism and voluptuousness have
scarcely been wanting to crown the
exaggerated scene we have been taught to
tremble at the terrific visages of
murdering janissaries and to blush at
the unveiled mysteries of a future
ceralio
attempts so extravagant as these to
disfigure or it might rather be said to
metamorphose the object render it
necessary to take an accurate view of
its real nature and form in order as
well to ascertain its true aspect and
genuine appearance as to unmask the
disingenuity and expose the fallacy of
the counterfeit resemblances which have
been so insidiously as well as
industriously propagated
in the execution of this task there is
no man who would find it an arduous
effort either to behold with moderation
or to treat with seriousness the device
is not less weak than wicked which have
been contrived to pervert the public
opinion in relation to the subject
they so far exceed the usual though
unjustifiable licenses of party artifice
that even in a disposition the most
candid and tolerant they must force the
sentiments which favor an indulgent
construction of the conduct of political
adversaries to give place to a voluntary
and unreserved indignation
it is impossible not to bestow the
imputation of deliberate imposture and
deception upon the gross pretense of a
similitude between a king of great
britain and a magistrate of the
character marked out for that of the
president of the united states
it is still more impossible to withhold
that imputation from the rash and
bare-faced expedients which have been
employed to give success to the
attempted imposition
in one instance which i cite as an
example of the general spirit the
temerity has proceeded so far as to
ascribe to the president of the united
states a power which by the instrument
reported is expressly allotted to the
executives of the individual states i
mean the power of filling casual
vacancies in the senate
this bold experiment upon the
discernment of his countrymen has been
hazarded by a writer who whatever may be
his real merit has had no inconsiderable
share in the applauses of his party
see cato number five
and who upon this false and unfounded
suggestion has built a series of
observations equally false and unfounded
let him now be confronted with the
evidence of the fact and let him if he
be able justify or extenuate the
shameful outrage he has offered to the
dictates of truth and to the rules of
fair dealing
the second clause of the second section
of the second article empowers the
president of the united states to
nominate and by and with the advice and
consent of the senate to appoint
ambassadors other public ministers and
consuls judges of the supreme court and
all other officers of the united states
whose appointments are not in the
constitution otherwise provided for and
which shall be established by law
immediately after this clause follows
another in these words the president
shall have power to fill up vacancies
that may happen during the recess of the
senate by granting commissions which
shall expire at the end of their next
session it is from this last provision
that the pretended power of the
president to fill vacancies in the
senate has been deduced
a slight attention to the connection of
the clauses and to the obvious meaning
of the terms will satisfy us that the
deduction is not even colorable the
first of these two clauses it is clear
only provides a mode for appointing such
officers whose appointments are not
otherwise provided for in the
constitution and which shall be
established by law
of course it cannot extend to the
appointments of senators whose
appointments are otherwise provided for
in the constitution article 1 section 3
clause 1 and who are established by the
constitution and will not require a
future establishment by law this
position will hardly be contested the
last of these two clauses it is equally
clear cannot be understood to comprehend
the power of filling vacancies in the
senate for the following reasons
first the relation in which that clause
stands to the other which declares the
general mode of appointing officers of
the united states denotes it to be
nothing more than a supplement to the
other for the purpose of establishing an
auxiliary method of appointment in cases
to which the general method was
inadequate
the ordinary power of appointment is
confined to the president and senate
jointly and can therefore only be
exercised during the session of the
senate but as it would have been
improper to oblige this body to be
continually in session for the
appointment of officers and as vacancies
might happen in their recess which it
might be necessary for the public
service to fill without delay the
succeeding clause is evidently intended
to authorize the president singly to
make temporary appointments during the
recess of the senate by granting
commissions which shall expire at the
end of their next session
secondly if this clause is to be
considered as supplementary to the one
which precedes the vacancies of which it
speaks must be construed to relate to
the officers described in the preceding
one and this we have seen excludes from
its description the members of the
senate
thirdly the time within which the power
is to operate during the recess of the
senate and the duration of the
appointments to the end of the next
session of that body conspired to
elucidate the sense of the provision
which if it had been intended to
comprehend senators would naturally have
referred the temporary power of filling
vacancies to the recess of the state
legislatures
who were to make the permanent
appointments and not to the recess of
the national senate who would have no
concern in those appointments and would
have extended the duration in office of
the temporary senators to the next
session of the legislature of the state
in whose representation the vacancies
had happened instead of making it to
expire at the end of the ensuing session
of the national senate
the circumstances of the body authorized
to make the permanent appointments would
of course have governed the modification
of a power which related to the
temporary appointments and as the
national senate is the body whose
situation is alone contemplated in the
clause upon which the suggestion under
examination has been founded the
vacancies to which it eludes can only be
deemed to respect those officers in
whose appointment that body has a
concurrent agency with the president
but lastly the first and second clauses
of the third section of the first
article not only obviate all possibility
of doubt but destroy the pretext of
misconception the former provides that
the senate of the united states shall be
composed of two senators from each state
chosen by the legislature thereof for
six years and the latter directs that if
vacancies in that body should happen by
resignation or otherwise during the
recess of the legislature of any state
the executive thereof may make temporary
appointments until the next meeting of
the legislature which shall then fill
such vacancies
here is an express power given in clear
and unambiguous terms to the state
executives to fill casual vacancies in
the senate by temporary appointments
which not only invalidates the
supposition that the clause before
considered could have intended to confer
that power upon the president of the
united states but proves that this
supposition destitute as it is even of
the merit of plausibility must have
originated in an intention to deceive
the people too palpable to be obscured
by sophistry too atrocious to be
palliated by hypocrisy
i have taken the pains to select this
instant of misrepresentation and to
place it in a clear and strong light as
unequivocal proof of the unwarrantable
arts which are practiced to prevent a
fair and impartial judgment of the real
merits of the constitution submitted to
the consideration of the people nor have
i scribbled in so flagrant a case to
allow myself a severity of animated
version little congenial with the
general spirit of these papers
i hesitate not to submit it to the
decision of any candid and honest
adversary of the proposed government
whether language can furnish epithets of
too much asperity for so shameless and
so prostitute an attempt to impose on
the citizens of america
publius